the president would you please state for
the record your knowledge asked to the
Warren Commission's conclusions
concerning the number timing and
direction of the shots the Warren
Commission conclusions reflected three
shots being fired the timing being
somewhere between four point eight and
seven point nine seconds depending on
which of the three shots missed they
concluded the three were fired only to
hit if the first and the third hit then
the total time span would have been
approximately five point six seconds if
either the first to the third missed
then the time would be conceivably
greater as long as perhaps seven point
nine or greater than that so am I
correct in summarizing your testimony to
be that the Warren Commission's
conclusion was at the range the timing
range of the shots was between four
point eight and seven point nine seconds
depending upon which shot missed yes sir
that's true
now what technical basis did the Warren
Commission technical basis did the
Warren Commission have for being able to
determine the timing of the shots they
used the Zapruder film which we're going
to see in a little while as a clock the
film was tested and the camera was
tested it was found that it ran at an
average running speed of eighteen point
three frames per second assuming that
all of the shots came from behind as the
Commission did and using this as a
passive clock it was determined that
this was the most accurate way to
reconstruct the assassination fine now
you've indicated that the Warren
Commission was unable to determine
exactly the timing sequence of the shots
and that was because the Warren
Commission was unable to conclude which
shot actually miss
and as a fruit of film itself what is
the time that elapses from the moment
the president was first showing a
reaction until the head shot the first
noticeable reaction on the film occurs
at the first frame where he reappears
from behind the road sign which is
Zapruder frame number 225 the head shot
occurs at 3:13 the difference between
the two frames we give the time span
with which the Warren Commission claimed
that happened which would be indeed 5.6
seconds and it's in that basis that the
Warren Commission said that if either
the first shot or the third shot missed
you would add approximately 2.3 seconds
to the overall range is that correct
this is correct because the mechanical
minimum operating time for the rifle
alleged to be used during the
assassination was an absolute minimum of
2.3 seconds to fire a shot cycle the
rifle that has pulled back the boat
automatically reinserting another bullet
closing the bolt and pulling the trigger
again without taking time to aim or
anything else a minimum firing time of
2.3 seconds that's how they arrived at
that figure fine mr. fine mr. Grodin
what wounds to your knowledge did the
Warren Commission attribute to the two
bullets that hit the occupants of the
limousine the second of the two bullets
which it was felt hit occupants of the
limousine was of course the fatal moment
when the presidents had explode the
earlier shot striking anyone in the car
according to the Commission first hit
the president in the back passing
through his body exiting from his chest
or the lower part of his neck the bullet
then went on to hit governor Connally
and the right shoulder exiting the right
side of his chest entering and exiting
his right wrist and eventually bearing
itself in his left thigh and is this the
bullet that has become the source of
what has been referred to as the single
Bullet theory yes indeed it has in other
words one bullet
passing through both the president and
governor Connally that's correct
mr. chairman at this time I would like
to refer to JPEGs of the f 273 it's
marked as an exhibit and I would like to
have it offered into the record point
and prior to proceeding mr. Chairman I
would like to indicate for the record
that the young lady sitting - mr.
Grodin's left is mrs. crisp Broden mr.
Grodin examining exhibit F 273 would you
please identify that for the record this
is a chart depicting the relative
positions of the two men governor
Connally and President Kennedy at
approximately the time where the Warren
Commission established in all
probability the first bullet struck it
was drawn by Warren Commission critic
and to the best of my knowledge it is
quite accurate
now that chart then is based upon the
photographic evidence
indeed it is the Zapruder film basically
which showed except for the moment
behind the road sign showed the position
of the two men through the entire
shooting statement what was the Warren
Commission's conclusion as to the time
the first bullet struck president
kennedy they concluded because of a
large tree a live oak tree growing
between the window Oswald was alleged to
a fired front and the point where the
president was in the car during the
motorcade roof that no shot would have
been fired before frame 210 because the
view was obstructed by the tree it can
be seen very clearly from the support of
film that by the time the president Rhee
emerges from behind the sign of 224 to
225 that candidio has already been hit
and he's responding to the wound within
a clutching motion therefore they
deduced the first bullet hit between
frames 210 and 224
now mr. Grodin what question about the
single Bullet theory is raised by this
chart the basic problem with with with
what the chart represents is the
alignment of the two men both on a
horizontal and a vertical plane if
indeed the bullet coming I'm sorry today
they answered the question I'm okay I
was going to suggest the single Bullet
theory that one bullet went on through
both men would have to follow a flight
path from that particular window if I
was what was the assassin therefore the
bullet coming down hitting the president
in the back exiting his throat would
have to have made some alteration in its
flight path in order to hit governor
Connally at the angle at which it did
indeed strike him and it would seem that
the bull would have had to make somewhat
of a zigzag type of situation that is
the bullet going through the president
perhaps doing something illogically as
it sounds stopping in midair or were
being deflected somewhere along its
route hitting governor Connally going
through his body making a slight
right-hand turn to hit him in the right
wrist and then being deflected off the
wrist almost 90 degrees to bury itself
in his left thigh this is the single
Bullet theory not as presented but at
the time that the shot was supposed to
happen for that entire sequence from 210
to 224 for that bullet to have done this
particular amount of damage it must have
taken a similar flight path to what I
just described so in summary then a
suggesting that according to this chart
which is based upon the photographic
evidence the relative alignment of the
two men in the vehicle was not
consistent with the flight path of a
single bullet they would seem so yes sir
going beyond this going beyond this
chart what questions if any about the
single Bullet theory have been raised by
the Zapruder film outside of the
alignment of the two men basically it's
the timing of the shots or the reactions
of the two men as mentioned before when
the president Rhee emerges from behind
the road sign he does show definite
signs of responding to a shot visually
at least the Zapruder film shows no such
evidence where Governor Connally is
concerned
can you explain at this time
in what way the single Bullet theory is
relevant to the Warren Commission's
conclusion that the president was shot
by a single gunman very simply I would
say it's this if the president were hit
between 210 and 224 it was a it was
requiring a minimum firing time of 2.3
seconds or I believe it's 43 frames that
is if the president were hit between two
bats let's say at frame 210 governor
Connally could not have been hit by a
separate bullet until 253 also if the
president were not hit until 224 we
would have to add 43 frames to that to
the point where Governor Connally would
be hit however the governor shows her a
very marked reaction by frame 237 to 238
which is only 1.8 seconds away too soon
for another shot to open fire now to
clarify your testimony I believe you
said that if the President had been hit
by flame 210 and based upon the 18.3
second standard the
for eighteen point three frames per
second standard and the fact that the
rifle needed 2.3 seconds to be
discharged according to your testimony
you said the governor could not have
been hit by a separate bullet until
frame to 33 to 53 but really what you
meant I think is he couldn't have been
hit by separate bullet fired by the same
gunman that's correct
I'm sorry if they didn't react like
clear assume assuming a single gunman
using that particular weapon the one
attributed to belong to Lee Harvey
Oswald now we are about to view these a
fruit or film and I would like you to
explain to the committee whether any
special techniques have been applied to
this film for the purpose of improving
its quality two techniques have been
involved the first the first that you
will see is merely a straight run
through of the film no special
techniques have been involved in this
except to color correct it slightly
right after that we'll be viewing a
special version of the film which has
been slowed down and it has been
subjected to a technique called
rotoscoping that is each frame is shot
individually repositioning the men in
the car to eliminate the shakiness of
the hand-held camera this is done by
using an optical printer centering the
point of interest in this particular
case the president and governor Connally
so that they filled the frame
eliminating all of the excess material
on the film so we can simply follow
their movements their reaction times in
relationship to each other and to the
car and the surrounding scenery now as
we view this film what particular points
should we be looking for in the first
run-through we will be getting a logical
feeling for the film it will be going
slower than life speed so it's easier
for anyone viewing it to indeed get it
get the the feeling and the and the
visual response it was on the film
during the second run-through we will
see various
aspects of the film and highlighted
detail what we should be looking for is
as the president Rhee emerges from
behind the sign that immediately upon
the re-emergence his arms go up in a
clutching protective motion toward his
throat not actually grabbing his throat
but much of a defensive type of attitude
then momentarily after that there's a
slight forward motion and push to the
president downward and forward and then
a few frames after that we'll see
governor Connolly's right shoulder
buckle sharply his cheeks will puff out
his hair will become immediately
disheveled all in one frame and I
believe we'll be showing that twice one
after the other so that if it's if it
goes by too quickly the first time it
will be seen again fine now if before
the film is is viewed mr. Chairman I
would like to state for the record that
this film is copyright the copyright
copyright date is 1967 and the owner of
the copyright is LMH incorporated I've
also been requested to state that the
film does show the head wound to the
president very vividly and for this
reason viewing is not advised for
persons who would be particularly
sensitive to this type of violence can
you please show the film at this time
may I also before we do show it suggests
that the TV cameras they'll be filming
it allow a black border at the bottom
because a great deal of the action
happens at the extreme bottom of the
frame and much of it might be lost Thank
You mr. Grodin
[Music]
want to know
mr. Grodin was the president's backward
motion apparent from the reprint of the
frames from the Zapruder film in the
Warren Commission report no it wasn't
apparent at all from the reprint what is
the reason for that sir
the the reason for that is in volume 18
of the Warren Commission appendix
volumes on page 70 and 71 the frames
including the head shot and immediately
following or printed they are labeled to
top to bottom and then left to right 313
314 315 and 316 this is not in fact what
we have here we have three thirteen
three fifteen fourteen and sixteen a
reversal of the two frames following the
shot to the president's head do you know
when this reversal was first discovered
it was discovered sometime after the war
on volumes were printed and it was not
an issue for the Warren Commission
itself it was discovered by a critic of
the Warren Report and I believe that the
comment was made officially and the the
answer was that it was an inadvertent
reversal of framed the effect of this
reversal of frames however would make it
appear as though the president was
thrown forward for two frames after the
shot quite quite markedly forward when
in fact the reverse was the case
mr. Grodin do you know whether there is
any photographic evidence that bears
upon the Warren Commission's conclusion
that Lee Harvey Oswald fired at the
president from the Texas School Book
Depository I'm sorry could you repeat
the question I'm sorry
certainly is there any photographic
evidence that touches upon the Warren
Commission's conclusion that Oswald
fired from the president from the School
Book Depository building there are
various photographs taken of the
depository at the time of the shooting
just before and just after some showing
the doorway of the depository others
showing the window some showing the
whole face of the depository some of
these were among the issues that were
raised for the scientific panels of the
chairman at this time I would like to
refer to what has been marked as JFK
exhibit F 121 F 122 and F 123 they are
they are blow-ups of photographs taken
by photographers and Dealey Plaza and I
move that they be admitted into the
record objection they may be entered
into the record thank you
[Music]
mr. Grodin would you please identify
each of these exhibits they exhibit on
the left is on the top part of the left
photograph is a motion picture frame one
single frame taken from a film by Robert
Hughes just as the president's car was
about to turn off of Houston Street onto
Elm on the bottom is a blow-up of the
window which was supposed to have been
the window used by the assassin
during the shooting which will begin
within seconds of this frame being taken
the one in the center the photograph in
the center was taken by a man named Tom
Dillard was a professional photographer
it is a newspaper photograph and it
shows the entire wall of the depository
this section which we see here is
somewhat cropped to highlight the window
again the same window that the assassin
was supposed to have used it was taken
an estimated three seconds after the
final shot was fired but that's probably
a loose figure within seconds would be a
more accurate statement
the final photograph the one on the
right on the bottom was a very similar
photograph taken by an army intelligence
man by the name of Powell who was
standing diagonally across the corners
of Houston and elm looking up he took
this photograph somewhere between 30
seconds in several minutes after the
assassination I am not clear as to the
actual timing on the top we see a
blow-up of the window in question which
is the easternmost window on the south
wall of the sixth floor of the Texas
School Book Depository mr. Grodin do any
of these exhibits show a clear image of
Lee Harvey Oswald in the sixth floor
window they do not the photographs as we
see them here do not show the clear
image of anybody
for what purpose did you bring these
photographs to the attention of the
committee in the case of the Hughes film
on the left when the film is viewed in
motion it is clearly evident that at
least the appearance of movement is
within the window which Oswald is said
to have used there is also a movement in
the next set of windows I felt that
perhaps enhancement of this particular
film and relevant frames of this entire
sequence might show a comparison
indicating movement within both windows
and perhaps that it could be clarified
enough or enhanced enough we might be
able to pick out something such as the
color of a shirt or clothing
I would not think that would be clear
enough to show anything in the way of
features of an individual's face the the
one in the middle the Dillard photograph
could conceivably since it was taken
seconds after the shots were fired could
conceivably from this angle show some
detail of someone's still in that window
in in what was described as the sniper's
nest if indeed that's what it was again
I felt that given scientific analysis
which had not been done before to my
knowledge that if there were an image
back there in the shadows it could be
enhanced to the degree of bringing out
such an image and it might show due to
the clarity of this particular
photograph if it was or was not Lee
Harvey Oswald in the final photograph
the one on the right it had been charged
that that shape that whitish shape that
we see in the window could very well be
the face and or head or portion of the
body of the assassin therefore I felt
that with what was available to the
public at that time which is a very
fuzzy black-and-white still we might be
able to determine whether that shape was
or was not an assassin or someone in
that window to knowledge mr. Grodin did
the Warren Commission ever have the
opportunity to do any sophisticated
photo enhancement work on these
materials I would say they did not there
is absolutely nothing in the record
indicating that they did on these
specific photographs in any rate
I'm difficulty understanding you since
you're here to sort of turn away from
your mic
I'm just put your mic up closer and try
to talk is that better
that's much better thank you all right
would you want me to repeat what I just
said or would you please certainly the
the question would you repeat the
question and I'll just certainly my
question was whether the Warren
Commission had occasion to conduct any
photo enhancement working these
materials and my answer to the question
was to the best of my Maalik knowledge
they did not and there's no indication
in the records that they ever did
[Music]
I would like at this point mr. Grodin to
turn to another area of Dealey Plaza
other than the Texas schoolbook
depository I would like to ask you
whether there is any photographic
evidence that bears upon the Warren
Commission's conclusion that there were
no other gunmen in Dealey Plaza other
than Lee Harvey Oswald okay or do you
have the specific exhibit certainly I'll
be glad to show you some exhibits mr.
chairman at this time I would like to
refer to what I've been marked as JFK
exhibits F 126 F 128 F 129 F 150 5 f 267
and F 274 we are going to be looking at
exhibits F 126 and F 128 right now
however I ask that all of the exhibits
that I just referred to be admitted into
the record and they may be entered into
the record
I would also like to indicate for the
record that mr. Grodin is going to be
asked to discuss series of exhibits
however they are only a sample of the
photographs that have been made
available to this committee
scrote Manju please identify these two
exhibits these two exhibits are
photographs taken from the same negative
a professional photographer for The
Associated Press James Elkins took a
series of five photographs numbered to
see two three four five six seven and
eight there were seven photographs I
believe this is negative number six or
the fifth in the sequence on the
photograph we see the entire photograph
including the sprocket holes of the film
and the borders of the entire image and
on the right we see an extreme blow-up
of an area that includes the fire escape
on what is what at the time was known as
the Dow Tech's building the Dallas
textile building and it shows a fire
escape and there is a man sitting on
that fire escape it's a black man with a
white shirt and dark trousers and
directly below him is an open window of
a broom closet there is a shape coming
out of the bottom of that window
diagonally from upper right to
bottom-left it's difficult a little bit
farther down down and a little bit to
the left down a little farther there we
go that's the image it had been the
question had been raised by various
critics of the Warren Report was this a
rifle or some weapon being projected
through the window and one of the
reasons for asking this question is the
shape does not appear later on and other
photographs and the man who is sitting
on the fire escape appears to be in some
form of distress in relationship to
other photographs which show him sitting
on that fire escape just moments earlier
thank you this time I'd like to have the
witness make reference to
JFK exhibits 1:29 and 1:55
[Music]
mr. Grodin would you identify these
exhibits and then indicate what issues
they've posed to the committee's
photographic evidence panel the foot the
photograph on the left is a print from a
Polaroid photograph taken by a witness
named Mary Moorman this is the second of
two photographs which she took that day
it was taken the moment of the explosion
of the president's head or a fraction of
a second after that in the foreground we
see the presidential limousine mrs.
Kennedy is the lightish area there and
the president is right next to her in
the foreground on the right we see part
of the image of the flanking motorcycles
in the background we see the area that
has become known as the grassy knoll on
the left at the top of the grassy knoll
over three bystanders we see the
stockade fence on the top of the know
which borders a parking lot and on the
left from the center to the left we see
a little bit more to the right there we
go
from here to the right edge or this
particular print we see a cement
retaining wall which is the front border
of a set of steps the three witnesses in
the background Emmitt Hudson and two
others that are on the Left are standing
on the steps that lead up behind that
wall on the right we see a photograph
taken by Phillip Willis it's his fifth
photograph and it was taken at about the
time of the first shot and in the
background we see the same information
that we see in the other photograph the
Mormon photograph on the left of course
here we see more of the limousine and
and more of Dealey Plaza in general now
specifically what issue is raised by
these photographs behind the corner of
that retaining wall a little bit more
than the left
there we go at this point on the Morman
photograph and at the end of the wall in
the same position right there in the
Willis photograph there is a figure this
figure was standing in line almost to
the degree in relationship to the
rearward motion in the president's head
the figure is on the grassy knoll has
never been identified at least to my
knowledge as to the identity of this
figure and after the assassination there
is some testimony in the record as to
this figure running away to the west or
to the north and being chased by other
witnesses the possibility that this
could be a gunman on the grassy knoll is
the reason why I raise the issue in the
first place
there is somebody there the question is
who was he and what was he doing there
and I felt that sufficient photo
analysis of these and other photographs
of the same person on the know there are
some half-dozen gliese might give some
clue to his identity so he could be
questioned in this matter
thank you at this time at this time I'd
like to refer to JFK exhibit F 124 in F
125 so chairman I ask that these
exhibits be entered into the record
without objection they may be entered
into the record before I ask you to
discuss these photographs mr. Grodin I
would like to clarify something you made
reference to one tape-recorded statement
made by mill chair and to two other
conversations as well in total how many
of the conversations were tape recorded
to your knowledge to my knowledge only
the initial conversation that included
the threat was actually taped recorded
the rest was the testimony or the
reports the FBI or Miami police reports
of William Somerset relating to his
subsequent meetings with Milt ear
fine I would like you know if you would
to examine these exhibits identify them
rather and explain how they pertain to
military as I described before the
photograph on the left on the on the
left as we view it is the number five
negative or the fourth in the series
taken by James Elkins it shows among
other things the fire escape that we saw
before in the background on the left
which will indicate again - it's a cross
reference to the other man but in the
crowds lining the county Records
building which is the white building and
center right there
in the crowd is this man who bears a
remarkable resemblance to Joseph mill
tear the photograph on the right the
exhibit on the right is on the bottom a
blow-up of that section of that
particular photograph and on the top is
a blow-up of a photograph taken in a
photo booth where you go and put in your
quarter and get four pictures this is
one of those frames and it shows Milt
ear
mr. Grodin to your knowledge do you know
whether the Warren Commission dealt with
this issue the Warren Commission
received the evidence dealing with mill
tear during the closing days of its
deliberations they did not act on the
information about mill tear and the file
was put in the National Archives do you
know whether the photographs showing the
man in the crowd and the photograph of
mill tear were ever studied by forensic
anthropologists to the best of my
knowledge up to this point in time or
until the life of this committee they
had not been so subjective Thank You mr.
chairman I would like at this time to
have the witness examine what had been
marked as JFK exhibits F 131 F 173 and F
174 I move that they be introduced into
the record
without objection they may be entered to
the record at this point
[Music]
mr. Grodin would you please identify
these exhibits and explain what issues
they raised the four photographs in the
exhibit on the left are four of seven
photographs depicting the arrest or
detainment of three individuals which
have become known as in quotes the
tramps they were arrested very soon
after the assassination behind the
depository on a railroad boxcar they
were taken across in front of the
depository diagonally across elm and
Houston toward Maine and the jail these
people have become a tremendous issue in
the last couple of years because there's
no record of the arrests they were
picked up in relationship to the
assassination but no records were kept
out the arrests there are no official
photographs of them no fingerprints or
identifications were ever taken or made
the two exhibits the one in the center
and the one on the on the right I
believe would represent attempts to
identify these people the allegations
were made sometime around 1976 that the
taller of the three tramps could very
well be Frank Sturgis of Watergate fame
and that the shorter of the three the
shortest of the three might be a Howard
hunt of war again of Watergate fame this
opinion was certainly not shared by all
of the critics but the issue was put
forward thereby creating the need to try
to identify these people which probably
should have been done anyway it had not
been
the man on the left in the center
exhibit is Frank Sturgis the man on the
right is the tall [ __ ] in the
photograph on the in the exhibit on the
right the short [ __ ] is at the top D
Howard hunt is on the left and the man
on the bottom is a man named Fred Lee
Chrisman who is another ultra right
winger a member of the Minutemen